Title: Latency-Aware Service Placement using Neural Combinatorial Optimisers for Edge–Cloud Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25553v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:46:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# EP-NCO: Latency-Aware Service Placement using Neural Combinatorial Optimisers for Edge–Cloud Systems 

## Kimia Abedpour a,∗, Mohammadsadeq Garshasbi Herabad b, Zheng Li a and Javid Taheri a,b 

> a

School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast , Belfast, BT7 1NN, UK 

> b

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Karlstad University Karlstad, 651 88, Sweden 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Edge–cloud computing Service placement Neural combinatorial optimisation Graph neural networks Reinforcement learning Latency optimisation 

A B S T R A C T 

The growth of Internet of Things (IoT) applications and latency-sensitive services has increased the demand for efficient service placement across compute continuum platforms, such as edge– cloud systems. Modern applications are decomposed into interdependent microservices deployed over heterogeneous infrastructures, making placement under resource and network constraints an intractable NP-hard combinatorial optimisation problem. This study proposes a latency-aware Edge Placement Neural Combinatorial Optimiser (EP-NCO), a learning-based framework for service placement in compute continuum platforms. EP-NCO employs a dual-graph model to capture resource relationships and service dependencies within both computing infrastructure and application structure. Graph neural networks (GNNs) learn structural embeddings of infrastructure nodes and service-components, whereas reinforcement learning policies construct feasible placements that account for execution latency, communication link delays, and bandwidth-sharing effects. Extensive simulations across multiple system scales demonstrate that EP-NCO consistently achieves high-quality placement decisions, reducing the total service response time by 46%–50% compared with metaheuristics (genetic algorithm and particle swarm optimisation) and by 25%–35% compared with controlled RL ablation baselines. Once trained, EP-NCO enables fast online inference, making it a practical solution for dynamic large-scale edge–cloud environments with hundreds of computing nodes, hosting thousands of applications, which is significatly beyond the capability of current scheduling systems. 

## 1. Introduction 

The advancement of Internet of Things (IoT) technolo-gies has enabled latency-sensitive applications such as smart cities, industrial automation, and intelligent transportation systems. However, the resulting scale and heterogeneity introduce significant design and management challenges, making scalable and maintainable software architectures essential [1]. Microservice architectures address these chal-lenges by decomposing applications into loosely coupled services, a trend accelerated by lightweight containerisation technologies that reduce resource overhead and simplify orchestration [2]. Cloud computing offers scalable computing and net-working resources; however, it often suffers from high la-tency because of the physical distance between data cen-tres and end edge-connected-devices. Edge computing miti-gates this limitation by extending computation closer to data sources [3]. Consequently, edge–cloud infrastructures are highly distributed and heterogeneous in terms of computing capacity and network connectivity, making efficient and adaptive service placement a fundamental challenge under dynamic workloads and resource constraints. Service placement in edge-cloud environments is a com-binatorial optimisation problem [4], where the goal is to 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> kabedpour01@qub.ac.uk

(K. Abedpour);  

> mohammadsadeq.garshasbi.herabad@kau.se

(M.G. Herabad);  

> zheng.li@qub.ac.uk

(Z. Li); j.taheri@qub.ac.uk (J. Taheri) 

> ORCID

(s): 0009-0009-5961-4633 (K. Abedpour); 0000-0002-2336-2077 

(M.G. Herabad); 0000-0002-9704-7651 (Z. Li); 0000-0001-9194-010X (J. Taheri) 

> 1

determine the optimal mapping between services and hetero-geneous computing nodes while satisfying constraints such as resource availability, latency requirements, and costs. As microservice components and candidate nodes increase, the solution space grows exponentially, making exhaustive searches computationally infeasible. This problem is classi-fied as NP-hard [5, 6, 7], implying that obtaining (comput-ing) optimal solutions cannot be guaranteed in polynomial time. This mandates practical approaches [8] to rely on rule-based heuristics, meta-heuristics, or learning-based meth-ods to explore the solution space and obtain (near-)optimal placement strategies within a reasonable time. Rule-based heuristic approaches [9, 10, 11] emphasise low computational overhead and fast decision-making; how-ever, they often sacrifice solution quality. Meta-heuristic methods [12, 13, 14, 15] explore the search space more extensively and typically achieve higher-quality solutions, albeit at the cost of significant computational overhead, thereby limiting their applicability to offline optimisation. Learning-based approaches [16, 17, 18] shift this cost to an offline training phase and enable fast inference; however, they frequently suffer from high training complexity and limited generalisation under dynamic system conditions. Reinforcement learning (RL), particularly Q-learning, has been widely applied to dynamic decision-making in edge–cloud environments owing to its adaptability to work-load and resource variations [19, 20]. However, the rapid growth of state–action spaces significantly limits its scala-bility and training efficiency in large-scale service placement scenarios [21, 22]. 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 18  

> arXiv:2606.25553v1 [cs.DC] 24 Jun 2026 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement
> Figure 1: Conceptual comparison of solution quality versus execution time for greedy, rule-based heuristic, metaheuristic, exact, RL, Q-Learning, and NCO approaches.

Neural combinatorial optimisation (NCO) has recently emerged as an alternative paradigm for solving large-scale combinatorial problems using neural networks. By learning constructive heuristics directly, often through RL, NCO can efficiently generate high-quality solutions without an ex-haustive search [23, 24]. This makes it particularly suitable for service placement problems with large and complex search spaces. Nevertheless, NCO-based solutions are still in their infancy and currently face multiple challenges, in-cluding generalisation across varying environments and the ability to handle strict constraints when solving multifaceted problems, such as the service placement problem for dis-tributed systems [25]. Figure 1 shows a visual/conceptual comparison of the relative performances of different optimisation paradigms, clarifying the trade-off between their solution quality and execution time. To this end, in this study, we designed an NCO-based ap-proach (EP-NCO: edge placement using NCO) to efficiently solve the service placement problem. In EP-NCO, the edge-cloud infrastructure is represented as a graph, where nodes correspond to computing resources and edges represent net-work connectivity. Node attributes encode characteristics such as processing capacity, memory, and storage availabil-ity. Service requirements and constraints are incorporated to capture deployment dependencies and resource demands. EP-NCO uses Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to capture the structural properties of the infrastructure graph and Reinforcement Learning (RL) to learn optimal sequential placement policies that map system states to deployment decisions. EP-NCO aims to optimise the response time and resource utilisation. The main contributions span from modelling to evaluation, as follows: 

• Developing a graph-based formulation of the service placement problem that captures infrastructure topol-ogy, heterogeneous node characteristics, and service requirements to provide a structured and scalable rep-resentation of edge-cloud systems. 

• Proposing an NCO-based approach (EP-NCO) that integrates GNNs with RLs to learn efficient service placement policies directly from system states. 

• Conducting extensive experiments to evaluate multi-ple solutions (rule-based heuristics, metaheuristics, RL-based, etc.), demonstrating their efficiency to solve the stated NP-hard service placement problem. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents a review of related work. Section 3 describes the proposed system model and formulates the optimisation objectives. Section 4 provides details on the de-sign of the proposed solution (EP-NCO). Section 5 presents the experimental setup and implementation details. Section 6 evaluates the efficiency of all methods. Section 7 concludes the paper by summarising the main findings and outlining future research directions. 

## 2. Related Work 

Existing research on latency-aware service placement in edge–cloud environments can be categorised into three main groups: heuristic approaches, metaheuristic solutions, and learning-based techniques. Each of these approaches proposes distinct strategies for assigning services to dis-tributed resources under latency and resource constraints, leading to different scalability, computational overhead, and adaptability. 

2.1. Exact Methods 

Exact methods typically formulate the service placement problem as an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) or Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model, incorporating latency, resource, and routing constraints within a rigor-ous optimisation framework. Such approaches guarantee globally optimal solutions and offer a precise mathematical representation of the system [26]. However, their compu-tational complexity increases exponentially with the size of the problem, rendering them impractical for large-scale or dynamic edge–cloud environments. Furthermore, these methods often depend on static assumptions and require complete knowledge of the system, which limits their ap-plicability in real-world scenarios [27]. Therefore, exact optimisation methods are not suitable for the problem setting considered in this study and are not explored further. 

2.2. Heuristics 

Heuristic methods are problem-specific strategies de-signed to obtain good-quality solutions at a low computa-tional cost by exploiting simplified rules or local informa-tion rather than exhaustive search. In latency-aware service placement, heuristics typically prioritise proximity-aware or delay-aware decisions, such as placing services closer to edge-connected-devices or selecting nodes with lower com-munication delay; however, they often rely on handcrafted rules and simplified optimisation models. Several heuristic approaches have been proposed for service placement. Wu et al. [11] introduced a decentralised fuzzy-control heuristic for online resource allocation; however, its reliance on predefined scoring rules limits its adaptability under com-plex dynamics. Xu et al. [28] proposed a gravitational search   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement

algorithm for DAG-structured task offloading, which incurs a high runtime overhead because of its population-based na-ture. Brogi and Forti [29] introduced a QoS-aware heuristic-guided backtracking framework that prioritises feasibility over optimisation, resulting in exponential worst-case com-plexity. Other specialised heuristics target constrained sce-narios, such as greedy graph colouring for virtual real-ity (VR) task allocation [30] and direct-to-device (D2D)-assisted offloading [10]; however, these approaches often rely on static assumptions and manual tuning. Overall, heuristic methods offer fast and lightweight solutions suitable for real-time and large-scale deployments; however, they generally lack optimality guarantees and adaptability in complex and highly dynamic edge–cloud environments. 

2.3. Metaheuristics 

Metaheuristic methods are high-level optimisation strate-gies that explore the search space using stochastic operators to escape local optima and typically achieve higher-quality solutions than simple heuristics, albeit at a significant com-putational cost. They have been widely applied to service placement and resource allocation in edge–cloud systems. Herabad et al. [31] proposed a multi-objective genetic al-gorithm (MOGA) for AR/VR service placement and demon-strated performance gains; however, it suffered from long convergence times because of its population-based nature. The same authors introduced E-PSOGA [12], a hybrid PSO– GA approach with improved reliability but similarly high runtime overhead. Souza et al. [32] applied an artificial bee colony algorithm for task offloading and achieved strong op-timisation quality at the cost of a substantial computational demand. Other hybrid metaheuristic approaches, includ-ing GA-SA-PSO [13], quantum-inspired PSO [14], and the Whale Optimisation Algorithm with autonomic control [33], further improve placement quality but remain sensitive to parameter tuning, memory-intensive, and poorly scalable as the problem size increases. Overall, the iterative and population-based nature of metaheuristics limits their applicability to offline optimi-sation scenarios, making them less suitable for latency-sensitive and large-scale edge–cloud environments. 

2.4. Learning-based Approaches 

Learning-based methods learn placement policies from historical or simulated interactions, shifting the computa-tional complexity to an offline training phase while enabling fast inference at runtime (i.e., inference time). In latency-aware service placement, these approaches can capture the complex relationships between workloads, network condi-tions, and resource availability, leading to adaptive and context-aware decisions. Learning-based approaches can be categorised into three main classes of solutions. 

RL-based approaches: RL-based methods have been widely explored as alternatives to metaheuristics for ser-vice placement. Several studies integrate GNNs with RL to model service dependencies and heterogeneous infrastruc-ture characteristics [34, 35, 36, 37]. While these approaches improve placement quality, they typically rely on complex architectures, accurate global state information, or extensive interaction data, resulting in high training costs and limited scalability under dynamic system conditions [17, 38]. 

Q-learning-based approaches: Q-learning-based meth-ods learn value functions through iterative interaction with the environment and benefit from their simplicity and model-free nature. For example, Wang et al. [39] proposed a hierarchical Q-learning framework for multi-level service placement. However, the exponential growth of the state– action space severely limits the scalability of Q-learning in large-scale and highly dynamic edge–cloud systems. 

NCO-based approaches: NCO-based approaches em-ploy neural architectures to learn constructive heuristics for solving large combinatorial optimisation problems. Xiao et al. [40] introduced an encoder–decoder NCO framework for task offloading under specific edge configurations. Despite promising results, existing NCO-based solutions still face challenges in generalisation across heterogeneous environ-ments and in handling strict placement constraints. Overall, learning-based approaches enable fast inference and adaptive decision-making but often incur high training costs and exhibit limited robustness under variable work-loads and large-scale deployment scenarios. In practice, RL-based methods are typically suitable for moderately dynamic environments, Q-learning for smaller problem instances, and NCO-based approaches for large-scale service placement tasks that require efficient online inferences. 

2.5. Research Gap 

Despite extensive research on latency-aware service placement, existing approaches exhibit fundamental trade-offs that limit their effectiveness in dynamic and large-scale edge–cloud environments. Heuristic and Exact methods provide fast and low-cost decisions but rely on handcrafted rules and local informa-tion, leading to suboptimal and poorly generalisable solu-tions. Metaheuristics improve solution quality through ex-tensive search; however, their high computational overhead makes them unsuitable for real-time scenarios. Learning-based approaches, particularly RL and Q-learning, enable adaptive decision-making but suffer from scalability issues, large state–action spaces, and high training complexity. Recent neural combinatorial optimisation (NCO) meth-ods offer fast inference and improved modelling capability, yet they still face challenges in generalisation across hetero-geneous systems and in handling strict constraints. Therefore, a critical gap remains in designing a place-ment method that simultaneously achieves high solution quality, scalability, and efficient online decision-making without relying on restrictive assumptions or excessive computational cost. This motivates the need for a scalable and generalisable learning-based framework capable of cap-turing structural dependencies while maintaining practical efficiency.          

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement
> Figure 2: Multi-tier edge-to-cloud architecture including edge-connected-devices, access point, edge, cloud, and cloud-connected layers.

## 3. Service Placement and System Model 

A multi-tier edge–cloud computing environment com-prising heterogeneous computational and networking re-sources is considered to represent an edge-cloud system (the most common representation of compute continuum platforms) that spans from edge-connected-devices to cen-tralised cloud servers. As illustrated in Figure 2, the architec-ture includes edge-connected-devices, access points, edge nodes, cloud servers, and cloud-connected-devices nodes. Collectively, they support the execution of distributed ser-vices to model a latency-aware service placement across the network. 

3.1. Service Placement Problem 

Service placement is a combinatorial optimisation prob-lem in which service-components are mapped to hetero-geneous computing nodes under resource and performance constraints. Let  = { 𝑐 1, … , 𝑐 𝐿 } and  = { 𝑣 1, … , 𝑣 𝑀 }

denote the service-components and available nodes, respec-tively. Equation (1) defines the binary decision variable 𝑥 𝑖𝑗 ,which indicates whether component 𝑐 𝑖 is assigned to node 

𝑣 𝑗 :

𝑥 𝑖𝑗 =

{

1, if 𝑐 𝑖 is assigned to 𝑣 𝑗 

0, otherwise . (1) Equation (2) enforces the resource capacity constraint on each node, ensuring that the total resource demand of assigned components does not exceed the available capacity: 

> 𝐿

∑

> 𝑖 =1

𝑥 𝑖𝑗 𝐝 𝑖 ≤ 𝐫 𝑗 , ∀𝑣 𝑗 ∈  (2) Equation (3) defines the optimisation objective of the ser-vice placement problem, which seeks an assignment 𝐗 that minimises the overall system cost, including execution link delay , communication overhead , and end-to-end response time :

min  

> 𝐗 ∈{0 ,1} 𝐿 ×𝑀

𝑓 (𝐗 ) (3) Component dependencies are modelled as a directed acyclic graph (DAG)  = ( , ). For each edge (𝑐 𝑢 , 𝑐 𝑣 ) ∈ , placing service-components on different nodes incurs communica-tion cost and latency constraints. The placement problem must satisfy strict CPU and memory capacity constraints and execution dependencies while minimising performance costs, yielding an NP-hard optimisation problem with an exponentially large search space [41]. 

3.2. Computing Nodes Model 

The computing infrastructure is modelled as a directed graph representing a heterogeneous set of computational resources. Let  = {1 , … , 𝑁 } denote the set of comput-ing nodes, which includes cloud nodes, edge nodes, cloud-connected nodes, and edge-connected-devices. Each node 𝑛 ∈  is characterised by its limited com-putational resources, namely its CPU capacity cpuCap 𝑛 and memory capacity memCap 𝑛 .

Network Model: 

Network connectivity between nodes is represented as a directed graph 𝐺 𝑛𝑒𝑡 = ( , 𝑛𝑒𝑡 ) where (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑛𝑒𝑡 

indicates the existence of a communication link from node 𝑖 

to node 𝑗 . Each link is associated with a bandwidth bw 𝑖𝑗 > 0

and a propagation link delay delay 𝑖𝑗 .

Service Model: 

Let  = {1 , … , 𝑆 } denote the set of services, where each service 𝑠 ∈  consists of a set of service-components 

𝑠 .Equation (4) represents the internal dependency struc-ture of each service as a directed acyclic graph: 

𝐺 𝑠 = ( 𝑠 , 𝑠 ) (4) where an edge (𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑠 indicates that component 𝑣 

depends on the output produced by component 𝑢 (i.e., 𝑣 can be executed after 𝑢 finishes). Each component 𝑐 ∈ 𝑠 requires cpuReq 𝑐 units of CPU, 

memReq 𝑐 units of memory, and generates output data of size 

dataSize 𝑐 .

3.3. Sequential Placement Model 

In this study, the service placement problem is solved us-ing sequential service placement decisions, wherein service-components are assigned to computing nodes one-by-one. Equation (5) defines the binary placement decision vari-able indicating whether component 𝑐 is assigned to node 𝑛 :

𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 =

{

1, if component 𝑐 is assigned to node 𝑛 

0, otherwise . (5) Each component 𝑐 must be assigned to exactly one com-puting node 𝑎 (𝑐 ) (𝑎 (𝑐 ) = 𝑛 if 𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 = 1). During the   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 18

Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement 

placement process, service-components are deployed se-quentially according to the service dependency structure. At each decision step, a placement action selects a node for the next service-component, considering resource availability and network feasibility constraints. 

3.4. Objective Function 

The objective function Equation (6) minimises the total response time of the deployed services, which is defined as the sum of the execution and communication link delays. This additive formulation models the overall system latency and serves as a tractable surrogate for end-to-end service performance. 

min  

> {𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 }

𝑇 total = 𝑇 exec + 𝑇 trans (6) 

Execution Time: 

The execution time in Equation (7) depends on the com-putational demand of each component and the processing capacity of the node on which it is deployed. 

𝑇 exec = ∑

> 𝑠 ∈

∑

> 𝑐 ∈𝑠

∑

> 𝑛 ∈

𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 

cpuReq 𝑐 

cpuCap 𝑛 

(7) 

Transmission Delay: 

Communication link delays occur when dependent service-components are deployed on different nodes. For each dependency (𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑠 , the data generated by component 

𝑢 must be transferred to the node hosting component 𝑣 .To model bandwidth contention, let 𝑠 𝑖𝑗 denote the num-ber of concurrent data flows traversing link (𝑖, 𝑗 ). Commu-nication is restricted to direct network links, and multi-hop routing is not considered to maintain model tractability in large-scale settings. Accordingly, 𝑠 𝑖𝑗 denotes the number of service dependencies directly using link (𝑖, 𝑗 ).Equation (8) computes the effective bandwidth under bandwidth sharing among concurrent flows: 

ef fBw 𝑖𝑗 = bw 𝑖𝑗 

𝑠 𝑖𝑗 

(8) Equation (9) is to calculate the total transmission link delay considering data transfer time and propagation link delay. If no direct network link exists between the selected nodes, the placement is considered infeasible and excluded from the decision process. 

𝑇 trans = ∑

> 𝑠 ∈

∑

> (𝑢,𝑣 )∈ 𝑠

( dataSize 𝑢 

ef fBw 𝑎 (𝑢 ),𝑎 (𝑣 )

+ delay 𝑎 (𝑢 ),𝑎 (𝑣 )

)

. (9) 

3.5. Constraints 

Resource Capacity Constraints: 

Constraints (10) and (11) ensure that the total resource consumption of service-components deployed on each node does not exceed the available node capacities. 

∑

> 𝑠 ∈

∑

> 𝑐 ∈𝑠

𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 memReq 𝑐 ≤ memCap 𝑛 , ∀𝑛 ∈  (10) 

Table 1 

System model-related notation. 

Notation Description 

 Set of computing nodes (cloud, edge, cloud-connected-devices, edge-connected-devices-layer) 

𝑛𝑒𝑡 Set of directed network links between nodes 

𝐺 𝑛𝑒𝑡 = (  , 𝑛𝑒𝑡 ) Network connectivity graph 

bw 𝑖𝑗 Bandwidth of link (𝑖, 𝑗 )delay 𝑖𝑗 Propagation delay of link (𝑖, 𝑗 )

𝑠 𝑖𝑗 Number of concurrent flows sharing link 

(𝑖, 𝑗 )ef fBw 𝑖𝑗 Effective bandwidth of link (𝑖, 𝑗 ) (shared) 

 Set of services 

𝑠 Set of service-components in service 𝑠 𝐺 𝑠 = ( 𝑠 , 𝑠 ) DAG representing service structure 

(𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑠 Dependency: component 𝑣 depends on output of 𝑢 

cpuReq 𝑐 CPU requirement of component 𝑐 

memReq 𝑐 Memory requirement of component 𝑐 

dataSize 𝑐 Output data size of component 𝑐 

cpuCap 𝑛 CPU capacity of node 𝑛 

memCap 𝑛 Memory capacity of node 𝑛 𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 Binary placement variable (1 if component 

𝑐 is placed on node 𝑛 )

𝑎 (𝑐 ) Node to which component 𝑐 is assigned 

𝑇 total Total response time 

𝑇 exec Execution time of all service-components 

𝑇 trans Transmission link delay due to data trans-fers 

∑

> 𝑠 ∈

∑

> 𝑐 ∈𝑠

𝑥 𝑐,𝑛 cpuReq 𝑐 ≤ cpuCap 𝑛 , ∀𝑛 ∈  (11) 

Bandwidth Sharing Constraint: 

When multiple dependency flows are mapped onto the same network link, the available bandwidth is shared among them according to the effective bandwidth definition in Equation( 8). 

## 4. EP-NCO: Proposed Solution 

To solve the stated service placement problem, we de-signed EP-NCO, a learning-based NCO framework to learn scalable placement policies that generate high-quality, fea-sible solutions for edge-cloud systems. EP-NCO aims to address the inefficiency of exact solvers in relation to their exponentially growing execution time. 

Problem Statement(Service Placement): 

The service placement problem is modelled as a combi-natorial optimisation problem  = ( 𝑋, 𝑓 , ), where 𝑋 ⊆ 

{0 , 1} 𝑛 represents the discrete solution space, 𝑓 ∶ 𝑋 →

ℝ denotes the objective function to be minimised or max-imised, and  ensures that all constraints are satisfied, ex-pressed as 𝑔 𝑖 (𝑥 ) ≤ 0 or ℎ𝑗 (𝑥 ) = 0 . The optimal solution 

𝑥 ∗ = arg min 𝑥 ∈𝑋 𝑓 (𝑥 ) is subject to these constraints. 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement  

> Figure 3: Proposed dual-graph encoder–decoder architecture based on GNN encoding and autoregressive decoding with multi-head attention.

Neural Combinatorial Optimisation: 

The EP-NCO solver/model learns solution construction policies for discrete optimisation problems using existing solutions or procedures. EP-NCO uses a neural model to map problem instances to high-quality solutions. Given a search space 𝑋 and objective 𝑓 ∶ 𝑋 → ℝ, an NCO model then learns a parameterised policy 𝜋 𝜃 ∶ 𝑋 →  that generates solutions 𝑥 𝜃 such that 𝑓 (𝑥 𝜃 ) ≈ 𝑓 (𝑥 ∗). Architectures such as GNNs are used to encode structural constraints, thereby enabling near-instantaneous decisions in large-scale optimi-sation settings. 

Graph neural networks (GNNs): 

GNNs operate on graph-structured data  = (, ),where (a) each node 𝑣 𝑖 has features 𝐡 (0)  

> 𝑖

and (b) each edge encodes a communication or dependency relation. In this context, nodes correspond to either infrastructure graph nodes or service graph nodes, depending on the graph type. GNNs are used to capture multi-hop structural dependencies for downstream tasks to solve the service placement prob-lem. Equation (12) defines the node representation update at layer 𝑙 in EP-NCO, where neighbour messages are aggre-gated: 

𝐡 (𝑙 +1)  

> 𝑖

= 𝜙 (𝑙 )

⎛⎜⎜⎝

𝐡 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑖

, ⨁  

> 𝑣 𝑗 ∈(𝑖 )

𝜓 (𝑙 )(𝐡 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑖

, 𝐡 (𝑙 ) 

> 𝑗

, 𝐞 𝑖𝑗 )

⎞⎟⎟⎠

(12) 

4.1. Dual-Graph Representation and State Encoding 

Figure 3 illustrates the NCO architecture of EP-NCO. The framework adopts a dual-graph representation that jointly models the computing infrastructure and the internal structure of services. The encoder employs GNNs to extract structural embeddings from both graphs, whereas the de-coder sequentially constructs a placement solution using an autoregressive policy guided by multi-head attention. This design enables the model to simultaneously reason about resource availability, network connectivity, and service-level dependencies. 

Network Graph Encoding: 

The computing infrastructure is represented as a directed graph 𝐺 𝑛𝑒𝑡 = (  , 𝑛𝑒𝑡 ), where infrastructure graph nodes correspond to heterogeneous computing entities across the compute (cloud–edge–edge-connected-devices) continuum, and infrastructure graph edges denote communication links. Each infrastructure graph node 𝑛 ∈  is associated with a feature vector describing its available computational re-sources (CPU and memory capacities), whereas each infras-tructure graph edge (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑛𝑒𝑡 captures link attributes between nodes (bandwidth and propagation link delay). A GNN ( NodeGNN ) encodes the infrastructure state. The infrastructure graph nodes are updated through a message-passing procedure in which each node aggregates infor-mation from its neighbouring infrastructure graph nodes. Equation (13) updates node 𝑛 at layer 𝑘 (𝐡 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑛

) after each iteration. 

𝐡 (𝑘 +1)  

> 𝑛

= 𝜎 (𝑊 (𝑘 ) ⋅ AGG ({𝐡 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

∶ 𝑢 ∈  (𝑛 )} )) (13) Here,  (𝑛 ) denotes the neighbourhood of node 𝑛 , 𝑊 (𝑘 )

is a trainable weight matrix at layer 𝑘 , AGG( ⋅) represents an aggregation function (e.g., mean aggregation), and 𝜎 (⋅)

denotes a nonlinear activation function. In EP-NCO, the NodeGNN comprises four message-passing layers and generates infrastructure graph node em-beddings with a dimension of 32 to capture both local re-source availability and global network connectivity patterns. This provides a compact representation of the infrastructure state for the placement policy. 

Service Graph Encoding:   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement

Each service is modelled as a DAG 𝐺 𝑠 = (𝑠 , 𝑠 ),where the service graph nodes represent service-components and service graph edges capture their data dependencies. Each service graph node is associated with a feature vector describing its computational requirements, including CPU demand, memory usage, and output data size. In harmony with NodeGNN, another GNN ( ServiceGNN )encodes service DAGs to compute embeddings for all ser-vice graph nodes. Similar to NodeGNN, ServiceGNN per-forms iterative message passing along the service graph edges. Equation (14) defines the embedding update for a service graph node 𝑐 at layer 𝑘 :

𝐡 (𝑘 +1)  

> 𝑐

= 𝜎 (𝑊 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠

⋅ AGG ({𝐡 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑢

∶ ( 𝑢, 𝑐 ) ∈ 𝑠 })) (14) where 𝑊 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠

denotes the trainable parameters of the Ser-viceGNN at layer 𝑘 . This message-passing mechanism al-lows the encoder to capture the structural dependencies and precedence relations between service graph nodes. The resulting embeddings summarise both the resource requirements and the structural role of each service graph node within the overall service workflow. 

4.2. Autoregressive Placement Policy and Constraint Handling 

Given the encoded dual-graph representation, EP-NCO con-structs placement solutions using an autoregressive decision process. Instead of optimising all service-components to infrastructure nodes simultaneously, the model sequentially assigns one service-component to one infrastructure node, thereby decomposing the original combinatorial problem into a series of conditional decision-making problems. 

Hard and Soft Decoding Strategies: 

To satisfy the system constraints during the sequential placement process, EP-NCO employs two decoding strate-gies: soft-decoding and hard-decoding .In the soft-decoder strategy, the autoregressive policy generates placement decisions without explicitly enforcing feasibility constraints during the decoding process. The pol-icy assigns probabilities to all candidate infrastructure graph nodes, thereby allowing the model to explore a broader action space during training. Constraint violations, such as insufficient resource capacity or infeasible network connec-tions, are not prevented during decision-making. Instead, they are incorporated into the optimisation objective through penalty terms added to the overall cost function. Conse-quently, infeasible solutions incur higher costs and are dis-couraged during learning. In the hard-decoder strategy, the autoregressive policy explicitly incorporates problem constraints into the decod-ing phase. At each decision step, feasibility checks were performed to ensure that the candidate infrastructure graph nodes satisfied the resource capacity and connectivity con-straints defined in the problem formulation. Infrastructure graph nodes that violate these constraints are masked and removed from the action space before computing the prob-ability distribution. Consequently, the policy restricts the search space by considering only feasible placements when generating decisions. Despite its restrictive behaviour, this constraint-aware decoding strategy significantly reduces the effective search space and prevents the generation of invalid placements. Moreover, by updating the infrastructure node capacities and network states after each assignment, the hard-decoder maintains an incremental representation of the system state, thereby enabling subsequent decisions to account for previously allocated resources. In summary, each decoder has its own pros. and cons. The hard-decoder provides a more structured and constraint-compliant decision-making process by restricting the action space to feasible solutions and improving decision stabil-ity. However, this restriction may limit exploration and in-crease the risk of suboptimal policies. In contrast, the soft-decoder allows for a broader exploration of the solution space and may discover better placements; however, it re-lies on penalty-based learning and may generate infeasible intermediate solutions, leading to slower convergence. 

Autoregressive Decision Process: 

Let {𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, … , 𝑐 𝐶 } denote the ordered sequence of service-components to be placed, following the dependency constraints of the service graph. At each step 𝑡 , the policy selects a hosting infrastructure node for service-component 

𝑐 𝑡 conditioned on the current system representation and the assignments made in previous steps. Equation (15) defines the factorisation of the joint as-signment distribution under the placement policy: 

𝜋 (𝐱 ) = 

> 𝐶

∏

> 𝑡 =1

𝜋 (𝑎 (𝑐 𝑡 ) ∣ 𝐡 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑐

, 𝐇 (𝑡 )

> 𝑛

) (15) where 𝐡 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑐

denotes the embedding of the current service-component obtained from ServiceGNN, and 𝐇 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑛

repre-sents the set of infrastructure graph node embeddings in NodeGNN. To evaluate the candidate placements, the decoder com-putes the compatibility scores between the service-component embedding and the embeddings of all candidate infrastruc-ture graph nodes using a multi-head attention mechanism. These scores are then transformed into a probability distri-bution via a softmax function, enabling stochastic sampling during training and greedy selection during inference. 

Feasibility Masking for Constraint Enforcement: 

The hard constraints defined in Section 3 are enforced during decoding through feasibility masking, which removes infeasible assignments from the action space at each decision step. 

Resource Capacity Constraints : A service-component can only be assigned to an infrastructure node if sufficient residual CPU and memory resources are available. Infras-tructure graph nodes that violate Constraint (10) are masked and assigned a zero probability. 

Connectivity Constraints : For each dependency graph-edge (𝑢, 𝑣 ) where service-component 𝑢 has already been as-signed to infrastructure node 𝑖 , assigning service-component 

𝑣 to infrastructure node 𝑗 is allowed only if a corresponding   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement

communication link (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑛𝑒𝑡 exists. This ensures that the data transfer requirements remain feasible during placement construction. 

Incremental State Updates : After each assignment, the system state is updated to reflect the consumed computa-tional resources and induced network traffic. The residual infrastructure node capacities are reduced accordingly, and the link utilisation levels are updated, allowing subsequent decisions to account for the evolving infrastructure state. 

Penalty-Based Handling of Residual Violations: 

Certain global effects, such as bandwidth sharing among multiple simultaneous data transfers, can only be fully eval-uated once a complete placement has been constructed. To capture these effects, EP-NCO incorporates a penalty mechanism into its optimisation objective. Placements that induce severe congestion or zero effective bandwidth are penalised by adding a weighted violation term to the overall response time. This encourages the learned policy to gener-ate placements that satisfy local feasibility constraints and achieve efficient global utilisation of network resources. 

Exploration and Inference Modes: 

During training, the autoregressive policy samples node assignments according to the learned probability distribu-tion, with temperature and entropy regularisation applied to promote exploration. During evaluation and deployment, the policy operates in a deterministic greedy mode, selecting the highest probability feasible node at each step to generate a stable and reproducible placement solution. Combined with explicit feasibility masking and penalty-based refinement, the autoregressive decoding process en-ables EP-NCO to effectively bridge the gap between the formal optimisation problem and a scalable, learning-driven placement strategy. 

4.3. Reinforcement learning (RL) in EP-NCO 

In RL models, sequential decision-making is formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) ⟨, , 𝑃 , 𝑅, 𝛾 ⟩, where a policy 𝜋 (𝑎 𝑡 ∣ 𝑠 𝑡 ) selects actions to maximise the expected discounted return 𝐺 𝑡 = 𝔼 [∑ ∞ 

> 𝑘 =0

𝛾 𝑘 𝑟 𝑡 +𝑘 

]. By interacting with the environment, in this context, the agent learns placement policies that map states to actions without explicit search-ing. This makes RL suitable for large dynamic edge–cloud settings. The service placement problem formulated in Section 3 does not provide an explicit optimal supervision signal be-cause the objective function depends on complex interac-tions between service-component placements, resource con-tention, and network congestion effects. Moreover, exact op-timisation is computationally infeasible for realistic system-scale applications. Consequently, EP-NCO adopts the RL framework to learn an effective placement policy through direct interaction with the optimisation objective. 

Markov Decision Process Formulation: 

The placement procedure is modelled as a finite-horizon MDP. At each decision step 𝑡 , the agent observes the current system state, represented by the dual-graph embeddings described in Section 4.1, and the residual resource and network states induced by previous assignments. This action corresponds to selecting a feasible infrastructure node for the current service-component 𝑐 𝑡 , as detailed in Section 4.2. Environmental transition is deterministic and is defined by the state update rules following each assignment, includ-ing reductions in available infrastructure node resources and updates to link-level bandwidth usage. An episode termi-nates once all service-components across all services are assigned. In EP-NCO, an ’episode’ corresponds to con-structing a complete placement solution for a given prob-lem instance, whereas an ’epoch’ denotes a full pass over the training dataset comprising multiple episodes. In other words, each epoch consists of multiple episodes. 

Reward Design and Objective Alignment: 

A reward signal is provided only after a complete place-ment solution is constructed. This episodic reward formula-tion directly reflects the global optimisation objective while avoiding biased intermediate signals that could distort the optimisation landscape. The reward signal was derived di-rectly from the optimisation objective. After the completion of a placement episode, the total response time is computed according to Equations (7) and (9), incorporating both exe-cution and transmission link delays, as well as bandwidth-sharing effects. Equation (16) defines the episode-level reward as the negative total cost, thereby aligning the RL objective with the minimisation of the total response time: 

𝑅 = − (𝑇 exec + 𝑇 trans + 𝜆 𝑉 ) (16) where 𝑉 denotes the number of residual constraint vio-lations, such as zero effective bandwidth induced by con-current flows, and 𝜆 is a penalty weight that controls the severity of these violations. This formulation ensures that the placement policy is explicitly discouraged from producing infeasible or highly congested placements while still allow-ing gradients to propagate during training. 

Policy Gradient Optimisation: 

Equation (17) defines the optimisation objective for the placement policy with parameters 𝜃 , including those of NodeGNN, ServiceGNN, and the autoregressive decoder. The objective of the learning process is to maximise the expected return obtained from the placement policies: 

𝐽 (𝜃 ) = 𝔼 𝜋 𝜃 [𝑅 ] (17) where 𝑅 denotes the episode-level reward, as defined in Equation (16). The gradient of this objective is estimated using the 

REINFORCE policy gradient estimator. Let {𝑎 1, 𝑎 2, … , 𝑎 𝐶 }

denote the sequence of node selections generated by an autoregressive decoder. Equation (18) defines the policy gradient of the objec-tive: 

∇𝜃 𝐽 (𝜃 ) = 𝔼 𝜋 𝜃 

[

𝑅 

> 𝐶

∑

> 𝑡 =1

∇𝜃 log 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 )

]

(18)   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement

where 𝑠 𝑡 represents the system state at decision step 𝑡 .This gradient encourages action sequences that lead to lower response times and fewer constraint violations. Equation (19) defines the entropy-regularised optimisa-tion objective, where entropy regularisation is incorporated to improve training stability: 

𝐽 ′(𝜃 ) = 𝔼 𝜋 𝜃 [𝑅 ] + 𝛽 (𝜋 𝜃 ) (19) where (𝜋 𝜃 ) denotes the policy entropy and 𝛽 controls the strength of the exploration regularisation. 

Exploration Strategy and Regularisation: 

Effective exploration is critical because of the large and structured action space. During training, stochastic action selection was employed by sampling the policy distribution at each decision step. A temperature parameter is applied to the action logits to control the sharpness of the distribution, thereby enabling a smooth transition from exploration to exploitation as the training progresses. In addition, entropy regularisation is incorporated into the optimisation objective to prevent premature convergence to suboptimal policies. The entropy coefficient is gradually annealed during training, allowing the policy to initially explore diverse placement patterns before focusing on high-quality solutions. 

Training Procedure: 

EP-NCO training was conducted using a dataset of syn-thetically generated service placement instances spanning multiple system scales [42, 43]. At each training iteration, batches of problem instances were processed in parallel. For each instance, the policy constructs a complete placement through an autoregressive decoding process, after which the episode-level reward is computed. The policy parameters were updated using stochastic gradient descent based on the estimated policy gradients. To monitor the learning progress and mitigate overfitting, pe-riodic evaluations were performed using a greedy inference mode, in which the highest-probability feasible action was selected at each step. Early stopping was performed based on the stability of the evaluation performance across epochs. 

Inference and Generalisation: 

At inference time, the learned policy operates determin-istically in a greedy mode, generating a placement solution through sequential node selection without stochastic sam-pling. This ensures reproducible and stable deployments. Importantly, the learned policy is not tied to any specific problem instance (or a specific collection of them); instead, it generalises across varying numbers of services, service-components, and network configurations. This enables EP-NCO to scale effectively to large and previously unseen system scenarios, thereby addressing the limitations of exact and rule-based heuristic optimisation approaches. Overall, the proposed optimisation framework incorpo-rated into the EP-NCO enables it to directly approximate the solution of a complex combinatorial optimisation problem, producing high-quality and feasible service placement deci-sions with practical computational efficiency [42, 43]. 

Algorithm 1 EP-NCO : Dual-Graph Encoder–Decoder with RL Optimisation 

Input: Network graph 𝐺 𝑛𝑒𝑡 = ( , 𝑛𝑒𝑡 ) with node capacities and link attributes Service DAGs {𝐺 𝑠 = ( 𝑠 , 𝑠 )} 𝑠 ∈

Penalty weight 𝜆 , epochs 𝐸 , batch size 𝐵 

Temperature schedule 𝜏 (⋅), entropy schedule 𝛽 (⋅)

Output: Trained policy parameters 𝜃  

> 1:

Initialise policy parameters 𝜃 (ServiceGNN, NodeGNN, AR-Decoder)  

> 2:

for epoch = 1 to 𝐸 do  

> 3:

Sample a minibatch of 𝐵 placement instances  

> 4:

for all instances in minibatch (parallel) do  

> 5:

Initialise residual infrastructure node resources and link flow counters  

> 6:

 ← ∅ 

> 7:

𝐇 𝑐 ← ServiceGNN 𝜃 ({ 𝐺 𝑠 })  

> 8:

𝐇 𝑛 ← NodeGNN 𝜃 (𝐺 𝑛𝑒𝑡 ) 

> 9:

Determine service-component order 

{𝑐 1, … , 𝑐 𝐶 } 

> 10:

for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝐶 do  

> 11:

𝑐 ← 𝑐 𝑡  

> 12:

Construct feasibility mask 𝐦 ∈ {0 , 1} | | 

> 13:

𝐦 [𝑛 ] = 1 iff infrastructure node 𝑛 satisfies resource and connectivity constraints  

> 14:

𝓵 ← 𝑓 𝜃 (𝐡 𝑐 , 𝐇 𝑛 ) 

> 15:

𝓵 [𝑛 ] ← −∞ for all 𝑛 with 𝐦 [𝑛 ] = 0  

> 16:

if training then  

> 17:

problem instance 𝑎 (𝑐 ) ∼ sof tmax( 𝓵 ∕𝜏 ) 

> 18:

else  

> 19:

𝑎 (𝑐 ) ← arg max 𝑛 𝓵 [𝑛 ] 

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

 ←  ∪ {( 𝑐, 𝑎 (𝑐 ))}  

> 22:

Update infrastructure node resources and link flow counters  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

Compute 𝑇 exec , 𝑇 trans with bandwidth sharing  

> 25:

𝑅 ← −( 𝑇 exec + 𝑇 trans + 𝜆𝑉 ) 

> 26:

Store log-probabilities and entropy  

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

Update 𝜃 using policy gradient with entropy regu-larisation  

> 29:

end for  

> 30:

Inference: run greedy decoding to obtain 

## 5. Experimental Setup 

Simulation Environment: 

All experimental problem instances were generated us-ing the edge-to-cloud simulation framework, which was designed and introduced in [8, 31]. This comprehensive simulator allows the modelling of heterogeneous infras-tructures with varying service-based workloads. To provide controlled heterogeneity, stochasticity, and reproducibility,                         

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement
> Table 2
> Problem Instance Specifications at Different System Scales
> Scale Computing Edge-connected-devices Cloud-connected-devices Services service components
> S: Small 30 15 15 15 8M: Medium 60 30 30 30 8L: Large 100 50 50 50 8XL: XLarge 145 75 75 75 8

all simulator parameters (including compute-node capaci-ties, network bandwidth, latency, component resource de-mands, and data-transfer sizes) were sampled from prede-fined ranges derived from prior studies and industrial spec-ifications. This enables the realistic modelling of dynamic edge-cloud conditions and supports diverse deployment sce-narios for both training and evaluation. The implementation of the proposed EP-NCO framework, including training and evaluation scripts, is publicly available at [44]. 

Problem Instances: 

Three instance scales (S:Small, M:Medium, L:Large) were created to assess performance under increasing struc-tural complexity, with an additional XL:XLarge instance generated exclusively for scalability analysis. Each ser-vice comprised eight service-components presented as a DAG. The instance topologies included computing, edge-connected-devices, and cloud-connected-devices nodes. All simulations were executed in Python using PyTorch 2.9.0 (CPU) on Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS with 14 CPU cores, and training and evaluation were conducted using a fixed random seed. 

5.1. Placement Algorithms 

EP-NCO Setup and Training Details: Three EP-NCO mod-els (EP-NCO-S, EP-NCO-M, and EP-NCO-L) were trained on Small-, Medium-, and Large-scale instances, respec-tively, to learn the structural and statistical characteristics of their respective target scales. Table 3summarised the naming convention for all evaluated EP-NCO and RL variants , which indicates both the training scale and decoder type (hard or soft). The training instances included three categories of input features: (i) network-level attributes (bandwidth and link latency), (ii) node-level capacities (CPU and memory), and (iii) service-level requirements (CPU, memory, and output size). These features were encoded using NodeGNN and ServiceGNN encoders, and the model was trained using a policy gradient (REINFORCE) approach; EP-NCO employs graph embeddings of dimension 32 and a four-layer GNN architecture for both the infrastructure and service encoders. The hyperparameters were kept fixed across all experiments. The data loader used batch_size=1 , whereas policy gradients were accumulated over 16 trajectories per update (four in CPU-only runs). The learning rates were 2 × 10 −4 for the encoders and 2 × 10 −3 for the decoder. The reward is defined as the negative response time with a violation penalty. Variance reduction is achieved using a baseline equal to the GA response time when available, or an exponential moving average otherwise. The gradients are clipped to a maximum norm of 1.0. The temperature and entropy coefficients are annealed during training. Early stopping is based on greedy validation performance. All results were obtained using a fixed random seed and eval-uated on a held-out test set. During training, batches of 512 placement instances were processed in parallel. These configurations were selected empirically to balance training stability and computational efficiency on the available CPU-based hardware. To evaluate EP-NCO, its performance was directly com-pared with several baseline approaches grouped into three categories according to their nature. First RL baselines, . Second, two widely used metaheuristic methods, namely, the genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimisation (PSO), were considered. Third, a set of rule-based heuristic strategies: Task Continuation Affinity (TCA), Most Pow-erful Heuristic (MP), Most Data Size (MDS), and Least-Powerful (LP) [8, 31]. A detailed comparative analysis of these approaches is presented in Section 5). 

RL Baselines: The RL approach was evaluated under both hard- and soft-decoder settings. The hard-decoder enforces feasibility during action selection, whereas the soft-decoder addresses constraint violations through penalty terms. RL-based ablation variants implemented within the proposed framework were considered. These variants are in-spired by prior RL-based service placement studies [42, 43] and models customised for the service placement problem. These RL-based solutions were inspired by prior RL-based service placement/deployment studies but were substan-tially adapted to our problem setting; that is, introducing a dual-graph state representation, sequential autoregressive placement, feasibility masking, and a latency-aware episodic reward. 

Genetic Algorithm (GA): The Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a population-based metaheuristic that iteratively evolves candidate placement solutions using selection, crossover, and mutation operators. It is particularly effective for multi-objective optimisation problems, such as minimising service response time while maximising system reliability. How-ever, its iterative nature leads to a high computational over-head, and its runtime increases significantly with problem scale, limiting its suitability for real-time deployment [8, 31]. 

Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO): Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) is a swarm intelligence-based meta-heuristic in which candidate solutions are updated based on both individual and global best experiences. PSO can achieve fast convergence toward high-quality solutions. However, its performance is sensitive to parameter tuning, and it suffers from scalability issues in large and complex search spaces [8, 31]. 

Task Continuation Affinity (TCA): Task Continuation Affinity (TCA) is a rule-based heuristic that reduces com-munication overhead by placing dependent microservice components on the same or nearby nodes. It is computa-tionally efficient and well-suited for online decision-making.   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 18

Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement 

Table 3 

Explanation of Algorithm Names                   

> Name Description
> EP-NCO_SH EP-NCO trained on Small scale with hard-decoder EP-NCO_MH EP-NCO trained on Medium scale with hard-decoder EP-NCO_LH EP-NCO trained on Large scale with hard-decoder EP-NCO_SS EP-NCO trained on Small scale with soft-decoder EP-NCO_MS EP-NCO trained on Medium scale with soft-decoder EP-NCO_LS EP-NCO trained on Large scale with soft-decoder RL_SH [42, 43] RL trained on Small scale with hard-decoder RL_MH [42, 43] RL trained on Medium scale with hard-decoder RL_LH [42, 43] RL trained on Large scale with hard-decoder RL_SS [42, 43] RL trained on Small scale with soft-decoder RL_MS [42, 43] RL trained on Medium scale with soft-decoder RL_LS [42, 43] RL trained on Large scale with soft-decoder GA [8, 31] Genetic Algorithm baseline PSO [8, 31] Particle Swarm Optimisation baseline TCA [8, 31] Task Continuation Affinity heuristic MP [8, 31] Most Powerful heuristic LP [8, 31] Least-Powerful heuristic MDS [8, 31] Most Data Size heuristic

However, despite these advantages, it relies on local optimi-sation and often fails to achieve globally optimal placements [8, 31]. 

Most Powerful (MP): The Most Powerful (MP) heuristic assigns microservice components to nodes with the highest available computational capacity to reduce execution time. However, it ignores network-related factors, such as com-munication link delay, which can lead to inefficient overall placements in distributed edge-cloud environments [8, 31]. 

Least-Powerful (LP): The Least-Powerful (LP) heuristic selects nodes with the minimum sufficient resources re-quired to host each component, aiming to improve resource utilisation. It is simple and effective in enhancing resource efficiency. However, despite these advantages, this approach can increase execution and communication link delays, often resulting in suboptimal performance for complex problem instances [8, 31]. 

Most Data Size (MDS): The Most Data Size (MDS) heuristic prioritises placing components that generate large output data on nodes with favourable network conditions to reduce transmission link delay. It is effective in min-imising data transfer latency by considering communica-tion patterns. However, despite its effectiveness in reducing transmission delay, its strong emphasis on data size often leads to poor performance in complex, large-scale placement scenarios [8, 31]. 

## 6. Experimental Results & Analyses 

In this study, we evaluated the performance of EP-NCO with the primary objective of reducing the service response time while maintaining a low runtime, particularly in environments with limited resources. EP-NCO performs initial training followed by inference, ensuring that it effi-ciently adapts to different operational conditions. 

Figure 4: service placement response time of algorithms across different scales 

6.1. Overall Performance Analysis 

The results in Figure 4 demonstrate a clear performance differentiation among the evaluated placement strategies in terms of the average service response time across all infrastructure scales. Different EP-NCO variants (LH, MH, and SH) exhibited consistently superior behaviour, deliver-ing the lowest service response times throughout the eval-uation, with EP-NCO_SH achieving the most stable and efficient performance as the system size increased. The controlled RL ablation variants showed moderate effective-ness but degraded gradually with scale, indicating limi-tations in generalisation under higher system complexity. Classical metaheuristics, including GA and PSO, main-tained acceptable performance at small scales but experi-enced noticeable service response time increases on larger infrastructures, reflecting reduced optimisation capability in high-dimensional placement spaces. The remaining EP-NCO variants (LS, MS, and SS) achieved mid-range per-formance, outperforming the heuristic baselines but falling short of the primary EP-NCO configurations. Rule-based heuristics (TCA, MP, LP) incurred substantially higher link delays, revealing limited adaptability to large-scale service-placement conditions. Finally, MDS consistently yielded the highest response times across all scales, underscoring its in-efficiency in handling dense and complex service topologies. Collectively, the results confirm the strong scalability and optimisation robustness of the EP-NCO family, particularly EP-NCO_SH, relative to both metaheuristic and rule-based baselines. 

6.2. Aggregate Response Time Analysis 

The bar chart representation in Figure 5 provides a complementary perspective on the comparative behaviour of the placement strategies by highlighting their aggregate re-sponse time trends across all infrastructure scales. The visual grouping of algorithms makes the relative performance gaps more explicit, revealing a clear stratification between the EP-NCO family, controlled RL ablation variants, metaheuristics 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement  

> Figure 5: Average response time per service across infrastructure scales.

and rule-based heuristics. In particular, the consistently low bars associated with the EP-NCO configurations underscore their overall efficiency, whereas the progressively larger bars observed for rule-based heuristics emphasise their limited applicability. This aggregated view reinforces the general performance hierarchy identified earlier while enabling a more direct comparison of inter-algorithm disparities that may be less visually pronounced in the heatmap. 

6.3. Per-Service Performance Analysis 

Figure 6 illustrates the response time distribution of the first inference problem instances across all 75 services, allowing examination of the algorithmic behaviour at the granularity of individual services. Although the other scales exhibit broadly similar characteristics, we present only the 

XL case owing to its higher structural complexity, which provides the most informative visual contrast. The EP-NCO family demonstrated markedly low medi-ans and narrow variability ranges, reflecting strong service-level stability. This behaviour is largely attributable to the use of GNN within the EP-NCO architecture, which enables the model to capture relational dependencies in service DAGs, thereby maintaining consistent performance across heterogeneous service demands. A clear separation is also visible between the EP-NCO vari-ants with hard- and sof-decoders. The hard-decoder con-figurations achieve tighter distributions and more reliable service-wise behaviour. An analogous pattern emerges within the controlled RL ablation variants, where the hard-decoder RL models exhibit reduced dispersion compared with their soft-decoder counterparts, suggesting that deterministic de-coding enhances service-level consistency under high-dimensional placement conditions. In contrast, metaheuristics exhibit wider spreads and more frequent outliers, whereas rule-based heuristics display the largest variability and several extreme response time val-ues. Overall, these per-service distributions highlight that, beyond achieving superior averages, EP-NCO models de-liver significantly more predictable performance across indi-vidual services in dense, large-scale environments. Further-more, EP-NCO models with hard-decoders performed better than their counterparts with soft-decoders. 

6.4. Algorithm Computational Time and Complexity Analysis 

Table 4 summarises the computational characteristics of each algorithm by reporting their training cost, inference latency, and cumulative CPU usage on the XL topology. The learning-based families (EP-NCO and RL) incur substan-tial one-off training overheads, with larger decoder variants requiring significantly more computation owing to their increased model capacity. Despite these differences in the training cost, all learning models achieved sub-second inference times, indicating that once trained, they provide highly efficient per-request exe-cution. Metaheuristics (GA and PSO) avoid training costs but exhibit considerably higher inference times. Rule-based heuristics (TCA, MP, LP, and MDS) remain computationally minimal but have proven inefficient for complex large-scale problem instances. Overall, the table highlights a fundamental trade-off: learning-based approaches (i.e., EP-NCO and RL) pay a high upfront cost in exchange for extremely low inference latency, whereas non-learning-based methods (GA, PSO, TCA, MP, LP, and MDS) avoid training but incur higher per-execution runtimes with substantially lower solution quality for large-scale problem instances. 

Execution Time Analysis: 

In Figure 7, the runtime-based crossover curves illustrate the point at which the amortised cost of training a learning-based method becomes favourable relative to the repeated execution of non-learning-based approaches. For each learn-ing algorithm, 𝑁 ∗ 

> 𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒

represents the number of problem instances that the algorithm must solve to compensate for its lengthy training time (as compared with another algorithm). Equation (20) is calculated by comparing the TotalExecu-tionTime (TAET) for solving 𝑁 ∗ 

> 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒

problem instances using algorithm 𝑎𝑙𝑔 . For example, both EP-NCO_SH and GA take almost the same amount of time to solve 𝑁 ∗ 

> 𝑒𝑥𝑒

= 95 problem instances because TAET(GA, 𝑁 ∗

> 𝑒𝑥𝑒

) = TAET(EP-NCO_SH, 

𝑁 ∗

> 𝑒𝑥𝑒

).TAET (𝑎𝑙𝑔, 𝑁 ) = 𝑇 alg train + 𝑁 × 𝑇 alg infer (20) where 𝑇 train denotes the one-time training time, and 

𝑇 infer represents the per-problem-instance inference time. For the metaheuristics (GA and PSO), 𝑇 train = 0 .  

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 18

Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement 

Figure 6: Distribution of service response time per service in different training scales and inference of XLarge scale 

Table 4 

Algorithm RunTimes + CPU Cost per Algorithm (x-large scale)                                                                         

> Method Train Time (sec) Cores Inference (s) CPU Cost (sec)
> EP-NCO _SH 9072 (2.52 h) 14 0.92 127009 (35.28 h) EP-NCO_MH 30672 (8.52 h) 14 1.03 429409 (119.28 h) EP-NCO_LH 95004 (26.39 h) 14 0.97 1330056 (369.46 h) EP-NCO_SS 10512 (2.92 h) 14 0.88 147168 (40.88 h) EP-NCO_MS 37800 (10.50 h) 14 0.90 529200 (147.00 h) EP-NCO_LS 87480 (24.30 h) 14 0.90 1224720 (340.20 h) RL_SH 11052 (3.07 h) 14 0.80 154728 (42.98 h) RL_MH 60120 (16.70 h) 14 0.82 841680 (233.80 h) RL_LH 117324 (32.59 h) 14 0.89 1642536 (456.26 h) RL_SS 4212 (1.17 h) 14 0.88 58968 (16.38 h) RL_MS 24120 (6.70 h) 14 0.89 337680 (93.80 h) RL_LS 50760 (14.10 h) 14 0.78 710640 (197.40 h) GA 0196.574 96.57 PSO 0185.217 85.21 TCA 010.016 0.016 MP 010.017 0.017 LP 010.033 0.033 MDS 010.015 0.015

Because the inference costs of the EP-NCO and RL models remain nearly constant across additional problem instances, their cumulative runtime grows slowly, whereas GA and PSO exhibit strictly linear growth driven by their expensive per-run optimisation cycles. The crossover numbers are related to the nature of the algorithms. For example, EP-NCO_SH surpasses GA after approximately 95 problem instances and PSO after 108 problem instances, whereas EP-NCO_MH surpasses them after 321 and 364 problem instances, respectively. For the RL models, RL_SH crosses GA at approximately 115 prob-lem instances and PSO at 131 problem instances. This rapid amortisation of training costs highlights the efficiency of compact learning-based strategies for repeated large-scale placement decisions. Larger decoder variants (e.g., EP-NCO_LH and RL_LH) require higher crossover points owing to longer training times but ultimately achieve the same asymptotic advantage as the number of placements increases. Overall, this analysis confirms that learning-based strate-gies become increasingly favourable in terms of the total wall-clock execution runtime when deployment decisions are repeatedly required. 

Core-Hour Analysis: 

Core-hour analysis complements the runtime perspec-tive by explicitly accounting for core utilisation and re-vealing how the total compute expenditure evolves using different algorithms. For each learning-based method, the crossover number of problem instances ( 𝑁 ∗

> 𝑐𝑝𝑢

) at which the total cumulative CPU consumption surpasses that of another algorithm. Equation 21 shows the TotalAlgorithmCpuTime (TACT) is computed, and used to find the cross-over point (𝑁 ∗

> 𝑐𝑝𝑢

) where the total core-hour of one algorithm surpasses another one. TACT (𝑎𝑙𝑔 ) = ∑ 𝐶𝑇 (𝑇 alg train + 𝑁 ∗ 

> 𝑐𝑝𝑢

× 𝐶𝑇 (𝑇 alg infer ) (21) where 𝐶𝑇 denotes the number of CPU core-hours, 𝑇 train 

is the one-time training time, and 𝑇 infer is the inference time for each problem instance. In our experiments, all learning-based approaches used 14 cores during training and inference, resulting in sub-stantial initial core-hour consumption; however, their total core-hour grows slowly when solving problem instances, owing to nearly constant per-instance inference time. In contrast, metaheuristics (GA and PSO) operated on a single core; however, their cumulative CPU time increased rapidly because their optimisation procedures required a large num-ber of core-hours (even if they could be embarrassingly parallelised over 14 cores). The selected crossover exam-ples illustrate this behaviour: EP-NCO_SH reaches parity with GA at approximately 2040 problem instances (total core-seconds ≈ 146500s ≈ 40.69 hours) and with PSO at approximately 3640 problem instances (total core-seconds 

≈ 149600s ≈ 41.56 hours). Similarly, RL_SH crosses GA at approximately 1800 problem instances (total core-seconds ≈

174800 s ≈ 48.56 hours) and PSO at 2087 problem instances (total core-seconds ≈ 177900s ≈ 49.42 hours). Larger decoder models exhibited proportionally higher crossover points, reflecting longer training times. Overall, these results demonstrate that despite their higher initial computing investment, learning-based meth-ods become increasingly efficient in core-hours under a fixed compute-budget constraint when repeated large-scale placement decisions are required. Table 5 shows EP-NCO models employ a GNN encoder combined with a RL policy and decoder to learn effective service placement strategies. During training, these models 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement                                 

> Figure 7: Cross-over number of XL runs after which a learning method becomes faster end-to-end (training + N ×inference), and cross-over points by compute budget (CPU-hours). The learning methods are adjusted to accommodate the difference between 14 cores used in EP-NCO vs. one core used in GA/PSO.
> Table 5
> Comparison of training and inference time complexities of algorithms.
> Algorithms Training Time Complexity (Offline) Inference Time Complexity (Online)
> EP-NCO 𝑂 (𝐸 ×𝑇 ×𝑀 )𝑂 (𝑇 ×𝑀 )
> RL 𝑂 (𝐸 ×𝑇 ×𝐾 )𝑂 (𝑇 ×𝐾 )
> Metaheuristics None 𝑂 (𝐺 ×𝑁 ×𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 )
> Heuristics None 𝑂 (𝐶 ×𝑉 ×𝐾 )

perform multiple RL episodes, resulting in a time complex-ity of 𝑂 (𝐸 × 𝑇 × 𝑀 ), where 𝐸 denotes the number of training episodes, 𝑇 represents the number of placement decisions, and 𝑀 is the number of edges in the underlying graph. During inference, the trained model generates place-ment decisions through a single forward pass, resulting in a complexity of 𝑂 (𝑇 × 𝑀 ).In contrast, controlled RL ablation variants models use an MLP-based encoder to evaluate the action space across the available computing nodes at each decision step. Conse-quently, their training complexity is 𝑂 (𝐸 × 𝑇 × 𝐾 ). Their inference complexity is 𝑂 (𝑇 × 𝐾 ), where 𝐾 denotes the number of candidate nodes. Metaheuristic algorithms do not require an explicit training phase; however, they typically rely on iterative population-based search procedures, resulting in an infer-ence complexity of 𝑂 (𝐺 × 𝑁 × 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 ). Similarly, rule-based heuristics directly evaluate candidate placements without training, leading to a complexity of 𝑂 (𝐶 × 𝑉 × 𝐾 ), where 

𝐶 represents the number of service-components, and 𝑉 de-notes the number of candidate versions for each component. These results confirm that although learning-based ap-proaches incur a one-time training overhead, the resulting models can generate placement decisions in sub-second time frames. EP-NCO outperformed RL approached in this re-gard, enabling making near-instantaneous service placement decisions once the policy has been trained. 

6.5. Training Analysis 

Figure 8 illustrates the reward progression of all learning-based algorithms throughout training, providing insight into their optimisation dynamics and convergence characteris-tics. A consistent upward trend was observed across the EP-NCO family, with rewards steadily improving as training progressed. The hard-decoder variants (EP-NCO_SH, EP-NCO_MH, and EP-NCO_LH) converge more rapidly and exhibit smoother reward trajectories, reflecting the stability introduced by deterministic decoding. In contrast, the soft-decoder versions (EP-NCO_SS, EP-NCO_MS, and EP-NCO_LS) show slightly noisier learning curves but even-tually achieve competitive reward levels. This behaviour is expected because the GNN encoder in the EP-NCO captures the structural dependencies between services and resources, enabling more globally coherent policy updates during training. A similar pattern was observed in the controlled RL ablation variants. The RL models employing hard-decoders (RL_SH, RL_MH, and RL_LH) displayed faster and more stable convergence, whereas the soft-decoder variants (RL_SS, RL_MS, and RL_LS) demonstrated higher variance in reward progression, particularly in the early epochs. Because RL relies solely on an MLP decoder without graph-level rea-soning, its learning curves tend to exhibit more pronounced fluctuations, particularly for large-decoder configurations, where the policy search space becomes substantially wider. Nonetheless, all RL models followed a generally monotonic reward increase, indicating successful training (optimisa-tion), despite their less expressive representations compared to the EP-NCO -based models. A comparison of the two families reveals the distinctive role of GNN-based representation learning in accelerating and stabilising optimisation. In particular, EP-NCO mod-els consistently achieve higher reward levels within fewer epochs, especially when trained with smaller and medium-scale decoders (i.e., models trained on Small and Medium problem instances). This behaviour demonstrates their abil-ity to leverage graph structures for more effective credit    

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement
> Figure 8: Training reward progression of learning-based placement models. The curves illustrate the convergence behaviour of EP-NCO and RL variants across training epochs, highlighting the faster and more stable optimisation achieved by EP-NCO due to its GNN-based representation.

assignment. RL models, while computationally lighter dur-ing training, require more epochs to attain similar reward magnitudes and are more sensitive to the decoder scale. Overall, the training curves confirm that EP-NCO achieves superior convergence behaviour and reward quality, primar-ily because of its structured GNN encoders (NodeGNN and ServiceGNN) and the more efficient propagation of service– infrastructure dependencies during policy optimisation. 

Ablation Insight. To further assess the contribution of the proposed architecture, we compared EP-NCO with RL ablation variants that replace the GNN encoder with an MLP-based representation and remove explicit dual-graph modelling. The observed performance gap across all eval-uations (Figures 4–8) indicates that removing structured graph encoding leads to degraded solution quality and less stable training dynamics, highlighting the importance of the relational inductive bias in capturing service–infrastructure dependencies. 

6.6. Inference Analysis 

To evaluate the generalisation capability of the algo-rithms, we tested each method on 200 previously unseen problem instances for each scale. For clearer visual in-terpretation, Figure 9 presents the first 50 test instances from the XL configuration, wherein the complexity of the infrastructure renders the performance differences more pro-nounced. This subset allowed for a detailed comparison of per-problem instance behaviour while remaining representa-tive of the broader testing distribution, as the overall trends remained consistent across the entire set (200 instances) and across other scales. Among the learning-based methods, the EP-NCO family consistently achieved the lowest inference cost with mini-mal fluctuations between problem instances. Among them, EP-NCO_SH and EP-NCO_LH exhibited the most stable trajectories, remaining tightly bounded between approxi-mately 35 and 45 service response times. This predictable behaviour stems from the structured GNN encoder within        

> Figure 9: Inference performance on previously unseen XL problem instances. The first 50 test instances are zoomed-in to illustrate the per-instance behaviour of the EP-NCO and RL variants compared with the metaheuristic and heuristic baselines. Hard-decoder EP-NCO models consistently achieve the lowest and most stable service response time trajectories.

the EP-NCO , which captures service–infrastructure inter-actions and yields highly coherent decisions, even for un-seen inputs. The soft-decoder variants (EP-NCO_SS, EP-NCO_MS, and EP-NCO_LS) maintained competitive but slightly more variable performance, reflecting the stochas-ticity introduced by probabilistic decoding. The zoomed-in view further highlights this separation: hard-decoder EP-NCO models form the lowest-service response time cluster with minimal oscillations across the 50 tests. The controlled RL ablation variants demonstrated mod-erate performance, with consistently higher service response times and greater variability than their EP-NCO counter-parts. RL with hard-decoder variants (RL_SH, RL_MH, and RL_LH) shows smoother curves and improved inference robustness relative to their soft-decoder versions; however, they remain noticeably less stable than EP-NCO, owing to the absence of a graph-structured inductive bias. RL with soft-decoder models (RL_SS, RL_MS, and RL_LS) exhib-ited larger fluctuations across problem instances, particularly in the early segments of the curve, indicating less consis-tent generalisation under high-dimensional input conditions. Rule-base heuristics exhibited the highest overall inference   

> Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 18

Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement 

Table 6 

Performance Comparison Across Different Scales Algorithm Small Medium Large XLarge Mean Rank Mean Rank Mean Rank Mean Rank EP-NCO_SH 0.2964 1.97 0.3169 1.73 0.2992 1.86 0.3206 2.58 EP-NCO_MH 0.4456 4.97 0.4491 4.13 0.3814 3.00 0.3031 1.17                                                                                                                                 

> EP-NCO_LH 0.2903 1.03 0.3150 1.27 0.2972 1.14 0.3198 2.26 EP-NCO_SS 0.7500 9.17 0.7590 9.00 0.7800 11.72 0.7530 9.00 EP-NCO_MS 0.7820 13.33 0.8030 13.02 0.7890 13.25 0.8130 14.00 EP-NCO_LS 0.7530 10.18 0.7610 10.00 0.7800 11.64 0.7550 12.00 RL_SH 0.3980 4.03 0.4500 4.55 0.4610 5.00 0.4000 5.00 RL_MH 0.5100 6.03 0.5350 6.10 0.5090 6.01 0.4820 6.00 RL_LH 0.3890 3.02 0.4370 3.33 0.4500 4.00 0.3960 4.00 RL_SS 0.7630 11.23 0.7880 12.00 0.7640 9.14 0.7540 10.53 RL_MS 0.7900 14.39 0.8300 14.04 0.7990 14.33 0.8100 13.00 RL_LS 0.7650 12.24 0.7800 11.00 0.7650 10.14 0.7540 10.47 GA 0.5838 6.96 0.5845 6.91 0.5963 6.99 0.6054 7.00 PSO 0.6448 8.01 0.6480 8.00 0.6542 8.00 0.6598 8.01 TCA 0.8716 15.25 1.0189 16.34 0.8703 15.22 1.0663 16.52 MP 0.8527 14.58 0.9716 15.11 0.8664 14.78 1.0109 15.18 LP 0.9056 16.64 1.0181 16.51 0.9055 16.80 1.0475 16.31 MDS 1.1826 18.00 1.3983 18.00 1.1909 18.00 1.4661 18.00

service response times. Metaheuristics such as GA and PSO produced significantly larger and noisier curves, reflecting their lack of learning-based adaptation, where optimisation must be repeated from scratch for each test instance. This resulted in broad variability in solution quality. Rule-based heuristics (TCA, MP, LP, and MDS) remained the least competitive, with MDS consistently producing the high-est service response time range, often exceeding 100–130 service response times across the 50 test instances. These results align with earlier observations: while heuristics are computationally inexpensive, they fail to deliver meaningful optimisation performance for large-scale placements. Overall, the inference results clearly demonstrate that learning-based methods (particularly EP-NCO with hard-decoders) generalise effectively to unseen inputs, provid-ing low service response times and stable decisions across diverse service-placement scenarios. The performance gap between EP-NCO and all baseline methods widens further under XL conditions, highlighting the advantage of com-bining GNN representations with learned decision policies during inference. 

6.7. Ranking (Based on Friedman Mean Rank) 

To provide a statistically robust comparison, each al-gorithm was evaluated for over 200 independent problem instances per scale. Performance was analysed using the non-parametric Friedman test, which is appropriate for multiple-algorithm comparisons without assuming normal-ity and provides a scale-consistent comparative ordering of the evaluated methods [45]. For each instance, algorithms were ranked according to service response time (lower is better), and the average rank across all instances yielded the Friedman mean rank. The Friedman test indicates statistically significant dif-ferences among the algorithms across all scales (all 𝑝 <

0.001 ), rejecting the null hypothesis of equivalent perfor-mance and motivating post-hoc comparisons. The Nemenyi post-hoc analysis confirmed that the EP-NCO variants sig-nificantly outperformed heuristic and RL baselines, whereas 

Table 7 

Train–test cross-scale evaluation matrix for EP-NCO. 

Train Test Small Medium Large XLarge Small ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Medium ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Large ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

the differences with metaheuristics were less consistent across scales. As reported in Table 6, the EP-NCO vari-ants consistently achieved the lowest mean ranks across all problem scales, with EP-NCO_LH performing best in the Small, Medium, and Large settings, and EP-NCO_MH emerging as the top performer in the XLarge setting. In contrast, metaheuristic and rule-based approaches exhibit They had substantially higher mean ranks, highlighting the consistent performance advantages and robust scalability of the proposed framework as system complexity increased. Table 7 shows further analyse cross-scale generalisa-tion behaviour, we explicitly summarise the The train–test evaluation protocol. The table highlights whether an EP-NCO model trained on a given scale is evaluated on In other scales, making the cross-scale analysis explicit. These comparisons implicitly serve as ablation analyses. In particular, the performance gap between the EP-NCO and RL baselines highlights the importance of graph-based encoding, whereas the difference between hard and soft de-coders demonstrates the impact of feasibility-aware decision making. 

## 7. Conclusion 

This study presents EP-NCO, an NCO-based solution for latency-aware microservice placement in heterogeneous edge-cloud infrastructures. By combining a dual-graph rep-resentation with GNN-based encoding and autoregressive reinforcement learning, EP-NCO models execution, com-munication, and bandwidth-sharing effects for reasoning over resources and dependencies. Experimental evaluations across four infrastructure scales showed that EP-NCO with hard decoding significantly outperformed other approaches. Compared with metaheuristic baselines, such as GA and PSO, EP-NCO reduces response time by 46%–55% across scales and outperforms controlled RL ablation variants by 25%–35%. EP-NCO shows strong per-service performance with lower median response times and reduced variance across 75 services in XLarge deployment, indicating stable optimiza-tion under dense dependencies. It delivers near-instantaneous inference (0.9–1.0s), achieving 90 × speedup over GA and PSO, reaching break-even after solving about 100 problem instances. The model assumes static topology and direct-link communication, relying on synthetic workloads, which may limit applicability in dynamic real-world environments. These findings suggest EP-NCO can be a scalable, efficient solution for latency-sensitive applications like IoT services, 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement 

smart city infrastructures, online video games, and edge-assisted AI systems, where efficient placement is crucial. Future work will investigate dynamic workloads, multi-objective optimisation (e.g., security or reliability), and fed-erated training for decentralised edge systems. 

## Acknowledgements 

This research is supported in part by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), UK Research and Innovation (UKRI), under Grant EP/Y028813/1. Addi-tional support is provided by the Knowledge Foundation of Sweden (KKS). 

## CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Kimia Abedpour: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – origi-nal draft. Mohammadsadeq Garshasbi Herabad: Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Zheng Li: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Javid Taheri: 

Supervision, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. 

## Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted Technologies in the Writing Process 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT (OpenAI) for language refinement, proofreading, and editorial assistance. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

## References 

[1] Thatikonda Supraja, Priyanka Chawla, and Sukhpal Singh Gill. Ai-driven service placement in fog and edge computing environments: a systematic review, taxonomy and future directions. Cluster Comput-ing , 28(16):1–39, 2025. [2] Imane Taleb, Jean-Loup Guillaume, and Benjamin Duthil. A survey on services placement algorithms in integrated cloud-fog/edge com-puting. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(11):1–36, 2025. [3] Linghe Kong, Jinlin Tan, Junqin Huang, Guihai Chen, Shuaitian Wang, Xi Jin, Peng Zeng, Muhammad Khan, and Sajal K Das. Edge-computing-driven internet of things: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys , 55(8):1–41, 2022. [4] Qingmiao Jiang, Yuan Zhang, and Jinyao Yan. Neural combinatorial optimization for energy-efficient offloading in mobile edge comput-ing. IEEE Access , 8:35077–35089, 2020. [5] Farah Ait Salaht, Frédéric Desprez, and Adrien Lebre. An overview of service placement problem in fog and edge computing. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 53(3):1–35, 2020. [6] Hadi Tabatabaee Malazi, Saqib Rasool Chaudhry, Aqeel Kazmi, Andrei Palade, Christian Cabrera, Gary White, and Siobhán Clarke. Dynamic service placement in multi-access edge computing: A sys-tematic literature review. IEEE Access , 10:32639–32688, 2022. [7] Balázs Sonkoly, János Czentye, Márk Szalay, Balázs Németh, and László Toka. Survey on placement methods in the edge and beyond. 

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 23(4):2590–2629, 2021. [8] Mohammadsadeq Garshasbi Herabad, Javid Taheri, Bestoun S. Ahmed, and Calin Curescu. A lightweight learning-based approach for online edge-to-cloud service placement. Electronics , 15(1), 2026. ISSN 2079-9292. [9] Ayeh Mahjoubi, Javid Taheri, Karl-Johan Grinnemo, and Shuiguang Deng. Optimal placement of recurrent service chains on distributed edge-cloud infrastructures. In 2021 IEEE 46th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN) , pages 495–502. IEEE, 2021. [10] Muhammad Asif Khan, Emna Baccour, Aiman Erbad, Ridha Hamila, and Mounir Hamdi. Code: Computation offloading in d2d-edge system for video streaming. IEEE Systems Journal , 17(3):4014–4025, 2022. [11] Chunrong Wu, Qinglan Peng, Yunni Xia, Yong Ma, Wangbo Zheng, Hong Xie, Shanchen Pang, Fan Li, Xiaodong Fu, Xiaobo Li, et al. Online user allocation in mobile edge computing environments: A decentralized reactive approach. Journal of Systems Architecture ,113:101904, 2021. [12] Mohammadsadeq G Herabad, Javid Taheri, Bestoun S Ahmed, and Calin Curescu. E-psoga: An enhanced hybrid metaheuristic for optimal edge-to-cloud placement of services with multi-version com-ponents. IEEE Access , 2025. [13] Hemant Kumar Apat, Bibhudutta Sahoo, Veena Goswami, and Ra-bindra K Barik. A hybrid meta-heuristic algorithm for multi-objective iot service placement in fog computing environments. Decision Analytics Journal , 10:100379, 2024. [14] Marlom Bey, Pratyay Kuila, Banavath Balaji Naik, and Santanu Ghosh. Quantum-inspired particle swarm optimization for efficient iot service placement in edge computing systems. Expert Systems with Applications , 236:121270, 2024. [15] Tiansheng Huang, Weiwei Lin, Chennian Xiong, Rui Pan, and Jingx-uan Huang. An ant colony optimization-based multiobjective service replicas placement strategy for fog computing. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , 51(11):5595–5608, 2020. [16] Muhammad Fahimullah, Shohreh Ahvar, Mihir Agarwal, and Maria Trocan. Machine learning-based solutions for resource management in fog computing. Multimedia Tools and Applications , 83(8):23019– 23045, 2024. [17] Ankur Sharma and Veni Thangaraj. Intelligent service placement algorithm based on ddqn and prioritized experience replay in iot-fog computing environment. Internet of Things , 25:101112, 2024. [18] Sadananda Lingayya, Sathyendra Bhat Jodumutt, Sanjay Rangrao Pawar, Anoop Vylala, and Senthilkumar Chandrasekaran. Dynamic task offloading for resource allocation and privacy-preserving frame-work in kubeedge-based edge computing using machine learning. 

Cluster Computing , 27(7):9415–9431, 2024. [19] Jesse Clifton and Eric Laber. Q-learning: Theory and applications. 

Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 7:279–301, 2020. doi: 10.1146/annurev-statistics-031219-041220. [20] Byungjin Jang, Minho Kim, Gaspard Harerimana, and Jae Wook Kim. Q-learning algorithms: A comprehensive classification and applications. IEEE Access , 7:133653–133667, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ ACCESS.2019.2941229. [21] Tao Liu, Shuai Ni, Xiang Li, Yan Zhu, and Linghe Kong. Deep reinforcement learning based approach for online service placement and computation resource allocation in edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2022. doi: 10.1109/TMC.2022. 3141230. [22] Yao Chen, Yang Sun, Bo Yang, and Tarik Taleb. Joint caching and computing service placement for edge-enabled iot based on deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 9(20): 20006–20017, 2022. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3159913. [23] Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learn-ing for combinatorial optimization: A methodological tour d’horizon. 

European Journal of Operational Research , 290(2):405–421, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2018.10.063. [24] Natalia Vesselinova, Rebecca Steinert, Daniel F. Pérez-Ramírez, and Magnus Boman. Learning combinatorial optimization on graphs: A survey with applications to networking. IEEE Access , 8:120388– 120416, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3005682. [25] Ka Tai Chung, C. K. M. Lee, and Y. P. Tsang. Neural combinatorial optimization with reinforcement learning in industrial engineering: A survey. Artificial Intelligence Review , 2025. doi: 10.1007/ 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 18 Latency-Aware Neural Service Placement 

s10462-024-11045-1. [26] Farah Aït Salaht, Frédéric Desprez, and Adrien Lebre. An overview of service placement problem in fog and edge computing. ACM Comput. Surv. , 53(3), June 2020. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3391196. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3391196 .[27] Hadi Tabatabaee Malazi, Saqib Rasool Chaudhry, Aqeel Kazmi, Andrei Palade, Christian Cabrera, Gary White, and Siobhán Clarke. Dynamic service placement in multi-access edge computing: A sys-tematic literature review. IEEE Access , 10:32639–32688, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3160738. [28] Ling Xu, Yunpeng Liu, Bing Fan, Xiaorong Xu, Yiguo Mei, and Wei Feng. An improved gravitational search algorithm for task offloading in a mobile edge computing network with task priority. Electronics ,13(3):540, 2024. [29] Antonio Brogi and Stefano Forti. Qos-aware deployment of iot applications through the fog. IEEE internet of Things Journal , 4(5): 1185–1192, 2017. [30] Shiqi Li, Peng Lin, Jing Song, and Qingyang Song. Computing-assisted task offloading and resource allocation for wireless vr sys-tems. In 2020 IEEE 6th International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC) , pages 368–372. IEEE, 2020. [31] Mohammadsadeq Garshasbi Herabad, Javid Taheri, Bestoun SAhmed, and Calin Curescu. Optimizing service placement in edge-to-cloud ar/vr systems using a multi-objective genetic algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12849 , 2024. [32] Alisson Barbosa de Souza, Paulo Antonio Leal Rego, Vinay Chamola, Tiago Carneiro, Paulo Henrique Gonçalves Rocha, and José Neuman de Souza. A bee colony-based algorithm for task offloading in vehicular edge computing. IEEE systems journal , 17(3):4165–4176, 2023. [33] Mostafa Ghobaei-Arani and Ali Shahidinejad. A cost-efficient iot service placement approach using whale optimization algorithm in fog computing environment. Expert Systems with Applications , 200: 117012, 2022. [34] Wenkai Lv, Pengfei Yang, Tianyang Zheng, Chengmin Lin, Zhenyi Wang, Minwen Deng, and Quan Wang. Graph-reinforcement-learning-based dependency-aware microservice deployment in edge computing. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 11(1):1604–1615, 2023. [35] Shuangwu Chen, Qifeng Yuan, Jiangming Li, Huasen He, Sen Li, Xiaofeng Jiang, and Jian Yang. Graph neural network aided deep reinforcement learning for microservice deployment in cooperative edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing , 17(6): 3742–3757, 2024. [36] Kevin Afachao, Adnan M Abu-Mahfouz, and Gerhard P Hanke. Efficient microservice deployment in the edge-cloud networks with policy-gradient reinforcement learning. IEEE Access , 2024. [37] Lixing Chen, Yang Bai, Pan Zhou, Youqi Li, Zhe Qu, and Jie Xu. On adaptive edge microservice placement: A reinforcement learning approach endowed with graph comprehension. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 23(12):11144–11158, 2024. [38] Shanchen Pang, Teng Wang, Haiyuan Gui, Xiao He, and Lili Hou. An intelligent task offloading method based on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning in ultra-dense heterogeneous network with mobile edge computing. Computer Networks , 250:110555, 2024. [39] Yimeng Wang, Yongbo Li, Tian Lan, and Nakjung Choi. A rein-forcement learning approach for online service tree placement in edge computing. In 2019 IEEE 27th International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019. [40] Xiang-Jie Xiao, Yong Wang, Pei-Qiu Huang, and Kezhi Wang. Neural combinatorial optimization for multiobjective task offloading in mo-bile edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,2025. [41] Imane Taleb, Jean-Loup Guillaume, and Benjamin Duthil. A survey on services placement algorithms in integrated cloud-fog / edge computing. ACM Comput. Surv. , 57(11), June 2025. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3729214. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3729214 .[42] Dhruv Garg, Nanjangud C. Narendra, and Selome Tesfatsion. Heuris-tic and reinforcement learning algorithms for dynamic service place-ment on mobile edge cloud, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111. 00240 .[43] Kevin Afachao, Adnan M. Abu-Mahfouz, and Gerhard P. Hanke. Efficient microservice deployment in the edge-cloud networks with policy-gradient reinforcement learning. IEEE Access , 12:133110– 133124, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3461149. [44] Kimia Abedpour. Ep-nco: Latency-aware service placement us-ing neural combinatorial optimisation (code). https://github.com/ kimiaa45-ab/EP-NCO , 2026. Available online; accessed May 2026. [45] Janez Demšar. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. Journal of Machine learning research , 7(Jan):1–30, 2006. 

Kimia Abedpour received her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Computer Engineering (Software) from Marlik Nowshahr Institute and Tabarestan Chalus Institute, Iran, in 2019 and 2021, respectively. She is currently pursuing her Ph.D. in Computer Sci-ence at Queen’s University Belfast, United King-dom. Her research interests include cloud and edge/fog computing, service placement, and AI-based optimisation techniques. 

Mohammadsadeq Garshasbi Herabad is a PhD researcher in Computer Science at Karlstad Uni-versity, Sweden. His research focuses on intel-ligent and adaptive systems for distributed and dynamic computing environments. His work in-vestigates the use of machine learning and op-timisation techniques to improve system perfor-mance and reliability under dynamic conditions. He has authored multiple peer-reviewed publica-tions in international venues. His research interests include distributed systems, edge computing, and AI-driven optimisation. 

Zheng Li received his Ph.D. and M.Phil. degrees from the Australian National University (ANU) and the University of New South Wales (UNSW), respectively. He was a graduate researcher with the Software Systems Research Group at National ICT Australia (NICTA). He is currently a Lecturer at the School of Electronics, Electrical Engineer-ing, and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast, UK. His research interests include big data analytics, edge/cloud computing, empirical soft-ware engineering, and performance engineering. 

Javid Taheri is a full Professor with School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering, and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast (UK), and with the Department of Mathematics and Com-puter Science, Karlstad University (Sweden). He was also a visiting professor at Ericsson HQ (Swe-den) in 2022–2025. He received his Ph.D. in Mo-bile Computing from the University of Sydney, Australia. His research interests include cloud and edge computing, network virtualisation, software-defined networking, and AI-based optimisation. 

Abedpour et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 18